'\" t
.TH BYEBYTED 8 "2026-07-16" "byebyte 0.5.0" "byebyte manual"
.SH NAME
byebyted \- the byebyte storage daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B byebyted
.RB [ \-\-config
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-\-once ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B byebyted
is the only privileged actor in byebyte: it owns the truth about bytes at
rest \(em statvfs and tmpfs-usrquota polling, EWMA burn rate, ETA-to-full,
a per-directory sqlite index, and a category registry that
.BR byebyte (1)'s
.I purge
verb acts through. Nothing above the control socket ever needs privilege.
.PP
.B \-\-once
performs a single poll, writes
.IR status.json ,
and exits \(em used by
.B make smoke
and testing.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Config is the seed, never the master: every key is typed and clamped on
load; unknown keys are ignored; a tampered config can tune numbers within
the ranges below but can never grant the daemon a new ability or weaken
an invariant. Default path:
.IR /etc/byebyte/config.json .
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
key@default@clamp
poll_interval@30@2\(en3600 (seconds)
burn_tau@1800@60\(en86400 (seconds)
eta_cap_days@365@1\(en3650
warn_eta_days@7.0@0.1\(en3650
hot_eta_hours@24.0@0.1\(en8760
warn_free_pct@10.0@0\(en100
hot_free_pct@5.0@0\(en100
owner_uid@1000@0\(en2^31
scan_hour@3@0\(en23
index_min_bytes@1048576@4096\(en2^40
snapshot_ring@30@2\(en365
ballast_gb@2@0\(en32 (0 = off)
.TE
.PP
List-typed keys (validated as a list of strings, never clamped):
.IR include_fstypes ", " tmpfs_mounts ", " exclude_mounts ", " scan_roots ", "
.IR purge_disabled .
.I purge_disabled
may only name existing category ids to switch off \(em it can never add a
path or a category the daemon doesn't already compile in.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/byebyte/config.json
Seeded once at install (owner_uid from the installing sudo call), never
overwritten on reinstall.
.TP
.I /var/lib/byebyte/index.db
The per-directory scan index (sqlite, WAL mode).
.TP
.I /var/lib/byebyte/ledger.jsonl
One JSON line per purge deletion or ballast release: timestamp, category,
path, bytes, status.
.TP
.I /var/lib/byebyte/ballast/
Pre-allocated emergency-reserve slabs.
.TP
.I /run/byebyte/status.json
0640, owned by
.IR owner_uid .
Written atomically (tmp file + rename).
.TP
.I /run/byebyte/control.sock
0660, owned by
.IR owner_uid .
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Clean shutdown: the current poll loop iteration finishes, the socket is
closed.
.SH SECURITY
The relevant attacker is an unprivileged local process abusing the root
daemon; byebyted has no network attack surface at all.
.TP
.B Socket
AF_UNIX, newline-delimited JSON, bounded reads (4 KiB line cap, 5 s
timeout). Every connection is checked against
.B SO_PEERCRED
\(em only root or the configured
.I owner_uid
may issue commands \(em on top of the socket's own 0660 file mode. Two
independent gates.
.TP
.B Hostile input
Malformed JSON, non-objects, and unknown commands are answered with
.RI { \(dqerror\(dq : ...} and the connection ends; they never crash the
daemon.
.TP
.B Registry invariant
.I purge
can only delete what a compiled-in category detector positively
matches. Config may disable a category; it can never add one, and it can
never supply a raw path.
.TP
.B Quota reader
Effective headroom is
.IR "min(free, quota remaining)" " per mount, read via " quotactl_fd (2)
on x86_64 (other architectures report no quota). This is what catches an
EDQUOT-on-tmpfs condition that
.BR df (1)
cannot see.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR byebyte (1),
.BR byebyte-healthcheck (1),
.BR systemd.exec (5)
.SH AUTHOR
asuramaya and byebyte contributors.
