.TH BYEBYTE 1 "2026-07-21" "byebyte 0.10.0" "byebyte manual"
.SH NAME
byebyte \- verb CLI for the byebyte storage daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B byebyte
.RI [ verb ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B byebyte
talks to
.BR byebyted (8)
over its control socket and prints the answer. With no verb, it runs
.BR status .
Every verb accepts
.B \-\-json
for machine-readable output.
.SH VERBS
.TP
.B status
Headroom, burn rate, ETA-to-full, and quota per mount.
.TP
.BI why " [path]"
Instant du-tree from the index, age-tagged (big AND stale stands out).
Accepts
.B \-\-limit
.I N
(default 15). On a
.I btrfs
mount, prints a note when snapshots pin space the walk can't see (or when
btrfs accounting is unavailable).
.TP
.B blame " [\-\-since T]"
What grew since
.IR T ,
a join of two index snapshots.
.I T
is
.IR Nh / Nd / Nw
or
.IR YYYY-MM-DD ;
defaults to
.IR 1d .
Gains the same
.I btrfs
note as
.IR why .
.TP
.B scan
Kick off an on-demand index refresh (otherwise nightly).
.B \-\-wait
blocks until it finishes.
.TP
.BI purge " category " "[\-\-yes]"
Delete what a compiled-in category detector positively matches. Dry-run
by default; pass
.B \-\-yes
to execute.
.B \-\-all
is refused \(em one category per act. Categories: hf-hub, pip-cache,
uv-cache, thumbnails, project-artifacts, rotated-logs, journald,
snap-old. Every deletion is appended to
.IR /var/lib/byebyte/ledger.jsonl .
.TP
.B ghosts
List deleted-but-open files still holding disk blocks, grouped by the
process holding them and the mount they live on. Report-only \(em never
signals anything.
.TP
.B ballast " [release]"
Show the pre-allocated emergency reserve, or release it to free space
even at 0 bytes free.
.TP
.B kernels
List removable kernel packages (installed, not running, not newest) and
print the exact
.I apt autoremove
line. Never runs
.BR apt (8)
itself.
.TP
.B advise
One-line nudges: mounts nearing full, fast index growers, cold caches,
heavy ghosts, quota headroom running low.
.TP
.B burn " [\-\-seconds N] [\-\-limit N]"
Live per-process write rates, sampled over
.I N
seconds (default 5, clamped 1\(en30). When fanotify is available (root
only; CAP_SYS_ADMIN), each writer also names the directory it's writing
to, background-aggregated as events arrive \(em not resampled per call.
Absent the capability, writers are named by pid only, exactly as before.
.TP
.B sweep " [\-\-dry] [\-\-history [\-\-limit N]]"
The unattended reclaim policy. Double consent: the
.I byebyte\-sweep.timer
unit (disabled by default) is the opt-in to run at all; per-category arming
via
.I sweep_categories
in
.I config.json
(a subset of
.IR purge 's
own compiled-in categories \(em config can never widen it) is the opt-in to
actually
.B act
rather than preview. An unarmed category, or the whole call under
.BR \-\-dry ,
only ever previews and ledgers a
.I dry_run
entry; only armed categories delete anything, and every act is ledgered.
Kernel removal is always report-only here, regardless of config \(em running
.BR apt (8)
unattended is a separate, not-yet-made decision, kept out of this verb on
purpose.
.B \-\-history " [\-\-limit N]"
replays past sweep acts and previews from the ledger (default 15, most
recent first).
.TP
.B update " [\-\-check] [\-\-json]"
Delegates straight to
.BR byebyte\-update (8).
.B \-\-check
reports whether a newer release exists (notify tier, the daily timer's own
invocation); a bare
.B update
is the manual\-install consent tier. Never runs unattended \(em no
.B \-\-auto
tier is wired up from this CLI.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
$ byebyte status
byebyte v0.5.0   (status 3s old)
  /           824G free of   1.8T   burn quiet       full \(em
  /tmp         24G free of    30G   burn quiet       full \(em   [quota: 24.4G of 24.4G left]

$ byebyte why /var/log
612M in /var/log   (scanned 2h ago)
    480M  3d          /var/log/journal
    120M  12d         /var/log/apt

$ byebyte purge pip-cache
     1.2G  /home/asuramaya/.cache/pip
1.2G would be freed (dry-run \(em add \-\-yes to execute)

$ byebyte ghosts
    24.1G  pid 2046892  chrome           12334 fd(s)  on /tmp

$ byebyte burn \-\-seconds 3
    13.3M/s   pid 638912  rsyslogd          (writing on /)
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/byebyte/status.json
The read seam \(em mounts, burn rate, index state. Mode 0640.
.TP
.I /run/byebyte/control.sock
The command socket. Mode 0660, peercred-gated.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BYEBYTE_RUNTIME_DIR
Overrides
.I /run/byebyte
(status.json and control.sock live here). Used for testing.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Non-zero if the daemon is unreachable, or if the daemon answers with an
error (bad arguments, refused category, etc.) \(em the message explains why.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR byebyted (8),
.BR byebyte-healthcheck (1),
.BR byebyte-update (1)
.SH AUTHOR
asuramaya and byebyte contributors.
